Let's talk about mutable objects now. So
a mutable object is one whose value can
be changed. Python has the following
mutable objects built in: list, dict,
set and byte array. We'll be looking at
dictionaries and sets in the next
section in the course. So we can change
the value of mutable objects, without the
object being destroyed and re-created.
Alright, so let's see how our previous
example works when we're dealing with a
mutable object. I'm going to be using the
shopping list that we saw in a previous
section, and create a new Python file.
This time I'm going to call the file
mutable.py. I'm going to paste in the
definition for shopping list so grab
that from the previous section. You don't
want to do our typing in here. Now this
is future Tim putting an edit in this
program. I wondered whether you just
noticed the mistake I made when I created
mutable.py. So let's open the project
pane again. Notice the file mutable.py
doesn't exist in there, and that's
because I had the .idea folder selected,
and the file actually went in there when
I open it. So that happens - it's actually
the wrong place to put it in. Now
obviously, it'll still work -
you can see that we haven't got any
errors. To move it back, though, just
select the file, drag it back up to the
top of the project - Sequences, in this
case. You'll get a warning here telling
you, basically, are you sure you want to
move it, in which folder. We're going to
go to the folder that I selected, click
on OK, and you can see mutable.py
now exists in the right place and it's
been taken out of the .idea folder. Alright, so let's go back to coding now.
We're going to add some code to this and
start by typing another, or under that,
another_list is equal to shopping_list, and we'll do the
same thing - we're gonna print the IDs. So print id left
parenthesis and shopping_list,
and the next line we're going to do the
same, this time for another_list - very similar to what we did in the
last video. Run the program - checking
the IDs, you can see not surprisingly,
we get the same id for both variables.
Alright, so with that in mind, let's now
attempt to mutate our list. Now I'm going
to be going through all the things you
can do with lists, shortly. For now, though,
I'll use augmented assignment to concatenate
another list to the end of this one.
That's very similar to concatenating one
string onto another. So I'm going to type
shopping_list plus equals
and left square brackets, double quotes
cookies. Just the one entry in the list there.
Then we're going to print the
shopping list.
Run this, and I've printed out the shopping
list there because we haven't seen lists
being concatenated before. So notice that
I put a list, after the plus equals on
line 12. We have to enclose the string
cookies in square brackets, to make it a
list, as we've done there. And as you can
see by output, cookies is now in the list.
Alright, so we've successfully mutated
our list - we've added cookies to it.
Let's check the ID to see what's
happened. So I'm going to take a copy of
line 9 and paste that below line 13, so
on line 14, in other words. So before we
actually run this, what do you think will
happen? Will the ID remain the same, or
will we get a new ID after changing the
list? Well let's see. So I'm going to run the program.
Notice here now, that the ID remains
unchanged, and that's because lists are
mutable and Python was able to add a new
item to the end of the list, without creating a new list.
So now that you've seen the same thing done
with a mutable object, and have seen the
different behavior, the previous video on
immutable objects, should hopefully make
more sense. Strings are immutable. When we
tried to change a string, Python created
a new object - a new string - and re-attached
the name to it. Lists are mutable - they
can be changed. When we appended a new
item in this code, Python was able to
change the contents of the list, without
creating a new one.
So that's the difference between mutable
and immutable objects. An immutable
object can't be changed. You can create a
new object, and use the same variable
name for it, but you can't change the value of an
immutable object. Mutable objects, such as lists, can be changed, and I'm showing you an
example of that in this video. So walk
through the code from this video, and
perhaps the last one again, to check the
different behavior. When you're happy
with both videos, we'll have a look at
one implication of this difference.
See you in the next video.